\graphicspath{{fig/introduction/}}

\chapter{Introduction}
\label{cha:introduction}

\section{Motivation}
\label{sec:motivation}

Many of us have been struck by the inherent beauty of animals moving collectively; starlings 
gathering at dusk in huge numbers to perform the most mesmerising of ballets, the entire flock moving 
as if some fluid object; fish forming tight milling structures in defence against predation, changing 
direction in the blink of an eye and with a flash of silver. Collective motion has been observed over 
many different length scales, and is not constrained only to vertebrates. At the mesoscale, studies 
have been made of turbulent microbial suspensions \parencite{dunkel13}. Swarms of locusts, which are 
capable of occupying up to one fifth of the Earth's land surface during a plague, are also known to 
exhibit collective motion \parencite{bazazi08}.

\begin{figure}[!htbp]
	\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{murmuration.jpg}
	\caption{A particularly startling example of a starling murmuration, captured near Gretna in the 
Scottish Borders. Photograph: Owen Humphreys/PA.}
	\label{fig:murmuration}
\end{figure}

Over the years collective behaviour has become a thriving topic of multidisciplinary research, 
capturing the imaginations of physicists, biologists, mathematicians and statisticians. Our 
understanding has evolved significantly from early suggestions that collective behaviour results from 
thought-transference and telepathy between individuals \parencite{selous31}. Though we can often 
explain why animal aggregations are evolutionary advantageous \parencite{giardina08}, much less is 
known about how these structures are formed and maintained.

Much work has been invested in developing theoretical models which seek to explain emergent behaviour 
by interactions at an individual level. Such models have shown that individual interactions are 
sufficient to produce group-level structures. Many different simulations, implementing disparate 
interaction rules, are able to produce behaviour reminiscent of real flocking systems. However, these 
models have largely only been verified with comparison to empirical observation at a qualitative 
level, and a thorough quantitative comparison between field data and theory has been lacking.

In recent years technological and methodological advances have made it possible to capture the 
movements of large groups of animal aggregates \parencite{ballerini08}. With this data, it is only 
now that we are in a position to make a robust comparison between model predictions and real-world 
observations.

\section{Overview of thesis}
\label{sec:overview_of_thesis}

We begin this thesis by giving the reader a review of the literature surrounding collective 
behaviour. Important results and ideas of the field are introduced and discussed. After relaying the 
main results from the literature we discuss open problems and the future of research in the field.

\cref{cha:bayes_intro} introduces the reader to the field of Bayesian statistics. Important results, 
techniques and algorithms from the field will be outlined as well as problems that the practitioner 
may encounter, and how they may address these problems.

Now with a grasp of Bayesian statistics, the reader is given a short introduction to directional 
statistics in \cref{cha:direct_stats}. In this chapter we discuss why standard methods and techniques 
are inappropriate for handling circular data. With the shortfalls of standard techniques considered, 
we introduce methods from the study of circular statistics which are appropriate to use with 
directional data.