\graphicspath{{fig/lit_review/}}

\chapter{Literature review}
\label{cha:lit_review}

There is a large body of literature relating to the phenomenon of collective behaviour. Particularly 
unique to this literature is the variety of backgrounds in which the authors are trained. Biologists, 
physicists, applied mathematicians and statisticians have all made significant contributions to the 
field.

In this chapter we shall discuss some of the most important ideas and results from the literature 
surrounding collective behaviour; first by providing a quick overview of the advantages which 
collective behaviour offers individuals, before discussing the main two approaches to modelling: 
Eulerian and Lagrangian. After this we shall review previous work which focused on recording and 
utilising empiricial data to inform model selection.

\section{Biological function}
\label{sec:biological_function}

Behaving as a group can bring many advantages to the individuals involved. One classically considered 
 benefit of aggregation is an improved defence against predation. Shoaling groups of fish have the 
ability to confuse predators, as predators have difficulty selecting an individual target 
\parencite{landeau86}. As well as a confusion effect groups of individuals can be more vigilant than 
a single individual, allowing for the earlier detection of predators \parencite{pitcher93}. Despite 
these advantages, groups may in fact attract predators \parencite{wittenberger85}.

As well as providing defence against predation grouping can aid in foraging for food; collections of 
individuals are able to gather more information about an environment than lone individuals. In 
addition to foraging, collective motion aids group navigation and migration \parencite{simmons04}. 
For birds group navigation often brings an energetic advantage as individuals can work to form 
aerodynamically efficient shapes \parencite{weimerskirch01}. As well as these advantages, group 
living can aid in facilitating reproduction and the rearing of young.

As we have seen, collective living can bring many advantages to the individuals involved. However, we 
have yet to discuss the underlying mechanisms which generate and sustain the collective behaviours 
which are seen in nature.

\section{Mathematical approaches}
\label{sec:models}

Models of collective behaviour can largely be divided into two classes: Lagrangian and Eulerian. 
These descriptions are analogous to the models of fluid dynamics, where Lagrangian models consider 
flow in terms of interactions of fluid parcels and Eulerian models consider the changing fluid 
properties at a given point in space and time. In the context of collective behaviour, Lagrangian 
models simulate the movements and interactions of individuals and Eulerian models consider the 
changing properties of a group through space and time.

\subsection{Lagrangian models}
\label{ssec:lagrangian_models}

So called agent-based models (ABMs), also referred to as Lagrangian models, have proven a useful tool 
in modelling collective behaviours. In these models the behaviour of an agent is simulated at the 
individual level. An agent's behaviour is determined by social interactions with neighbouring 
individuals. Examples of typical interactions include the desire to move in the same direction as 
neighbours (alignment, or orientation), the desire to avoid collisions (repulsion) and a desire to 
remain close to neighbours (attraction). As well as simulating social behaviours, ABMs also specify 
how an individual identifies neighbours. An agent may, for example, identify neighbours as those; 
within a certain distance (metric interaction); positioned inside a field of vision or as one of a 
fixed number of closest individuals (topological interaction).

In a pioneering paper, \textcite{aoki82} developed an ABM to simulate the movements of schooling fish 
in two-dimensions. Here it was shown that collective behaviour can arise from simple interactions at 
an individual level and without the need of a leader. The model simulated zonal interactions in which 
the area around an individual is partitioned into zones of repulsion, alignment and attraction. The 
partitioning of space in this way is illustrated in \cref{fig:zone_illustration}, and has remained a 
popular idea in following literature. As well as zonal interactions this model accounted for fish 
having incomplete fields of vision, that is: a blind spot into which they cannot see. The simulation 
of a blind spot was utilised in further studies. Later, other models were also devised to simulate 
fish schools \parencite{okubo86, huth92}.

\begin{figure}[t]
	\includegraphics{zonal_tikz.pdf}
	\caption{An illustration of the area around an agent partitioned into multiple zones. zor: zone of 
repulsion, zoo: zone of orientation (or alignment), zoa: zone of attraction. The missing segment 
behind the agent represents a blind zone into which it cannot see.}
	\label{fig:zone_illustration}
\end{figure}

Following this, \textcite{reynolds87} formulated a theoretical model, motivated by the production of 
computer animations, which described the movement of flocking birds in three-dimensional space. To 
produce more aesthetically pleasing animations, the software, ``Boids'', implemented additional 
sophistications such as banking during turns. This focus on developing simulations which produce 
elegant behaviour made rigorous scientific analysis difficult. Interestingly, Tim Burton's 1992 
Batman Returns used a modified version of the Boids software to simulate animations of bat swarms and 
penguin flocks. Substantially more complex than Boids was the software package MASSIVE (Multiple 
Agent Simulation System in Virtual Environment), developed by Stephen Regelous for Peter Jackson's 
Lord of the Rings trilogy. This software was used in the striking battle sequences of the trilogy, 
where each individual orc, elf and miscellaneous creature was simulated as an agent with behaviour 
governed by a set of interaction rules \parencite{robbins17}.

Not motivated by Lord of the Rings, but instead motivated by research within statistical physics, 
\textcite{vicsek95} introduced a simple two-dimensional model in which self-propelled particles move 
with a fixed absolute velocity and align with neighbours within an interaction radius. This model is 
commonly referred to as ``Vicsek Model" (VM). Despite its simplicity this model produces complex 
behaviour resembling that of a real biological system. \textcite{vicsek95} investigated the phase 
transition between ordered and disordered motion as the density of particles and noise in the system 
varied. This transition from order to disorder is an example of a spontaneously breaking (rotational) 
symmetry, as the group has no preferred direction of motion \emph{a priori}, but under simulation 
each group chooses some arbitrary direction to travel in. Because of this, the Vicsek model stands as 
an apparent violation of the Mermin--Wagner Theorem, which states that continuous symmetries cannot 
be spontaneously broken by systems that are able to achieve long range order in dimensions $d\leq 2$ 
\parencite{mermin66}. However, VM is out of equilibrium and Mermin--Wagner only applies to systems in 
equilibrium --- so there is no violation after all.

\begin{figure}[t]
	\includegraphics[width=0.75\textwidth]{couzin.png}
	\caption{Taken from \textcite{couzin02}, the different steady-state solutions (swarm, torus, 
dynamically parallel and highly parallel) obtained by making small changes to model parameters of a 
three-dimensional flocking model.}
	\label{fig:couzin}
\end{figure}

Later, models were developed to explore the movements of mammals and other vertebrate groups. Using a 
3-dimensional model that follows the zonal approach of \textcite{aoki82}, \textcite{couzin02} showed 
major group-level behavioural changes as minor changes in individual interaction rules were made. 
With small changes in the model parameters, groups transitioned from disordered, swarm-like 
behaviour, to toroidal milling structures, to forming dynamic and highly parallel groups, as 
illustrated in \cref{fig:couzin}. In addition to this the author's simulations demonstrated evidence 
of the collective memory of a group, such that previous group structure influences future behaviour 
as interactions change.

Further research was made by \textcite{couzin05} which investigated how leaders influence the motion 
of travelling groups. A zonal repulsion-attraction-alignment model was used as the basis for this 
work. Here, though, a proportion of the flock were given information about a preferred direction of 
motion, and so balanced their social interactions with the desire to move in this direction. 
Individuals in the flock did not know which members of the group, if any, had information. 
Simulations showed that only a small proportion of leaders are necessary to guide groups with a high 
degree of accuracy. Further results investigated how groups of individuals make collective decisions 
in the face of conflicting desires.

As a method for exploring collective behaviour, Lagrangian models are very appealing in their 
intuitiveness and in the ease of implementing explicit behavioural rules. Though for many years the 
simulation and exploration of these models was limited by computing power; modern computation allows 
for the simulations of large groups over many time steps. With these advances in computing, and a 
growing interest in the field, a significant proportion of the literature focuses on the analysis and 
exploration of agent-based models.

\subsection{Eulerian models}
\label{ssec:eulerian_models}

Sometimes known as continuum models, Eulerian models are complementary to the Lagrangian method and 
work at a coarse-grained level \parencite{giardina08}. Eulerian models are typically constructed of a 
set of partial differential equations which describe how density and other properties of a group 
develops over time. This approach to modelling is often used to investigate the long-time spatial and 
density properties of groups.

One such Eulerian approach by \textcite{gueron93} modelled the movements of large groups of 
wildebeests. The predictions of the model were compared with aerial observations of migrating 
wildebeest in the Serengeti. The large-scale front patterns seen in the aerial photography were 
reproduced by the model.

Later, \textcite{toner98} introduced a quantitative continuum theory of flocking. There are 
similarities between the hydrodynamic equations introduced by the authors and the Navier--Stokes 
equation for simple incompressible fluids. This model is capable of predicting the existence of an 
ordered phase of motion, as is often observed in the field, and propagating density waves. Detailed 
analysis of the model is made using techniques (e.g. dynamical renormalization group) from 
nonequilibrium condensed matter physics and can be used to make quantitative predictions of the 
properties of the long-distance, long-time behaviour of the ordered state.

Eulerian models have also been used to analyse vortex solutions \parencite{topaz04} and stationary 
clump solutions \parencite{topaz06}.

However, the Eulerian approach is limited. Most analyses are restricted to a single dimension and the 
approach has not proven appropriate for modelling groups of low densities. With this in mind, and 
with the advantages of the Lagrangian approach, in this thesis we will concentrate entirely on 
modelling in the Lagrangian framework.

\section{Empirical studies}
\label{sec:empirical_studies}

Models of collective motion rely on apriorstic assumptions about the properties and behaviours of 
individuals. We also understand that the emergence of a biologically realistic pattern from 
simulating a theoretical model is not sufficient evidence of model correctness. That is, the 
emergence of a desired pattern is not evidence that a model is correctly capturing the interactions 
of individuals. This observation is further compounded by the understanding that models employing 
different local interactions can produce similar looking behaviour at the group level. As such, real 
data describing the dynamics of animal aggregations is essential to assess the validity and 
appropriateness of theoretical models and their assumptions.

Thorough comparison between real data and model has proven difficult largely because of the scarcity 
of appropriate data. The collection of suitable data can be a complicated and convoluted process. 
Taking observations in the field is technically demanding, requiring the precise calibration of 
sensitive measurement equipment, not to mention the additional difficulty of the typically 
three-dimensional nature of animal aggregations. Collecting data in a laboratory setting seems an 
obvious workaround, however this imposes restrictions on the types of behaviour which can be 
captured. A laboratory may be an appropriate environment to capture the movements of fish in a tank, 
but it certainly isn't appropriate to capture the movements of flocking birds. Despite the 
difficulties associated with collecting data, significant effort has been made to track the movements 
and dynamics of groups of individuals.

\begin{figure}[t]
	\includegraphics[width=0.75\textwidth]{ballerini_starlings.jpg}
	\caption{A flock of 1246 starlings reconstructed in three dimensions. Photographs taken at the same 
instant but $25$m apart (a--b) are used to reconstruct their three dimensional positions (c--d). To 
perform reconstruction \textcite{ballerini08} needed to match each bird in (a) to its corresponding 
image in (b). The red squares show five matched pairs of birds.}
	\label{fig:ballerini}
\end{figure}

Initial work was limited to tracking small numbers of individuals in groups. In these studies 
individuals were not linked through frames and hence the collected data had no dynamic component. The 
first breakthrough came from \textcite{cullen65} who used stereo photography to record the positions 
of fish in three dimensions.

Fish are an appealing subject to study as experiments are easily conducted in a laboratory setting. 
Furthermore, the movements of fish can effectively be restricted to two dimensions by conducting the 
experiments in shallow water. Because of these benefits, further research also concentrated on fish 
\parencite{partridge80, van_long85}. Having collected empirical data, these studies investigate 
properties such as the distance of individuals to their nearest neighbour, or the direction toward 
their nearest neighbour. Empirical studies were also made of small groups of flocking birds, with 
similar statistics and properties realised \parencite{major78, budgey98}.

More recently, a breakthrough study by \textcite{ballerini08} reconstructed the three dimensional 
positions of flocks of starlings consisting of up to 2600 individual members (\cref{fig:ballerini}). 
To collect the data the authors used a combination of stereometric and computer vision techniques. 
Having collected and extracted the dataset, the authors began by constructing angular density plots 
of nearest neighbours. These plots revealed a strong anisotropy in the flock, with a lack of nearest 
neighbours positioned along the direction of motion. Having investigated how this anisotropy decays 
as a function of nearest neighbour, the authors concluded that interactions are not dependent on 
metric distance (interactions with agents within a fixed distance), as most models in the literature 
assume, but on a topological distance (interaction with a fixed number of closest agents, 
irrespective of distance). This analysis suggested that on average a starling interacts with between 
six and seven of its closest neighbours.

\begin{figure}[t]
	\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{lukeman_data.jpg}
	\caption{Image field data and the process of transformations to extract positions of a flock of surf 
scoters \parencite{lukeman10}.}
	\label{fig:lukeman_extraction}
\end{figure}

A significant contribution to the field was made by \textcite{lukeman10}, whom collected and analysed 
data of large numbers of diving ducks interacting on the surface of a lake. Crucially, this dataset 
tracked individuals between frames and therefore allowed the reconstruction of a bird's trajectory 
through space and time. This data showed an increase by factor of ten the number of individuals which 
could be reliably tracked though time \parencite{lukeman09}. The extracted dataset was investigated 
and plots of nearest neighbour densities were realised. It was observed from these plots that the 
highest density of neighbours occurs at some preferred distance, in front of and behind the focal 
bird. Further analysis fitted varying zonal models to the data. Optimal parameters were fitted to 
best reproduce the spatial neighbour densities and density as a function of circumferential distance. 
It was concluded that a zonal repulsion-alignment-attraction model with an additional frontal 
interaction was best able to reproduce the desired spatial and angular neighbour distributions.

Following this, \cite{katz11} investigated two and three fish shoals of golden shiners. Data was 
recorded by placing fish in shallow tanks of water and using custom tracking software to convert 
video footage into data describing the centre of mass of fish through time. Working in a classical 
mechanics framework the authors map the effective forces acting on a focal fish as a function of 
position and velocity. It was found that the dominant interaction between fish was the regulation of 
their speed. No evidence was found of explicit alignment of direction between individuals; instead, 
alignment occurred as a product of attraction and repulsion between individuals. Pairwise 
interactions were seen to predict the spatial distributions of neighbours, and this observation was 
validated for shoals of 10 and 30 individuals.

Analysis of empirical data has so far focused on properties of individuals such as nearest neighbour 
distances or angular neighbour densities. Research has then focused on fitting models which are best 
able to replicate these properties. With technological advances we expect that more and more 
empirical data will become available in the future.

\section{Numerical studies}
\label{sec:numerical_studies}

\textcite{mann11} acknowledged that an important aspect of model fitting is knowing the associated 
uncertainty of inferred parameters. The author continued to stress the importance of quantifying 
uncertainty in parameter inference on collective behaviour models, as the associated empirical 
datasets often have high levels of noise. With the importance of capturing uncertainty in mind, Mann 
demonstrated a fully Bayesian approach to parameter inference on data simulated from a collective 
behaviour model. Here, in contrast to the empirical studies made, parameters were inferred on their 
ability to reproduce the trajectories of agents, as opposed to the ability to reproduce epiphenomena 
such as nearest neighbour densities or angular neighbour plots.

The agents in Mann's model moved under a weighted sum of alignment and attraction. After ten 
timesteps the simulated data transitioned from disordered motion to a steady state rotating mill. The 
author then compared the ability to infer the weighting parameter, interaction radius and other 
properties of the agents in two situations: before and after the achievement of steady state. It was 
discovered that the interaction radius could not be reliably inferred when the agents had formed the 
rotating mill structure, although it could be inferred in the disordered motion before steady state. 
This result can be understood by considering that stable groups present a limited number of particle 
configurations, and are therefore less informative than out of equilibrium groups.